---
title: "Esri in One Hour: Michael Gaigg on UI/UX Design" 
date: "2018-07-12"
imageURL: "../../img/story-map-intro-wide.png"
---
I had the pleasure of speaking with Mike Gaigg this morning about work, life, and user interface and user experience design. Michael took our Esri in One Hour to more of a personal place than my other chats this summer, and asked my right off the bat how I viewed my future. When I told him I was still flexibly exploring options, and that Esri was my first real internship in a corporate environment, he stepped me through some of his perspectives. 

Mike shared with me that there are three types of companies in this tech area niche: "big-name" companies, such as Google, Facebook, or Twitter, where people may value the name over the actual day-to-day of work you are engaging in; start-ups, where they will either work or not, and be exhilleratingly adrenaline propelled through either option; and Esri, which is placed in the category between these two options. In Mike's experience, Esri can feel like a start-up, a big company, or a family company, depending on who you work with. It is this blended mix of these environments, and, with such a flat structure, these elements proceed and coexist simultaneously. 

Mike works in Redlands as an UI/UX Designer. Cody, here, is on his team, but is the one member out of Mike's 5-person design team who works in a regional office. There are always things for Mike's UI/UX team to do, and he commented on how he liked this pace of working with a lot of different projects. He said it was great to change gears so often, because transitioning kept thing interesting, and "if you don't like something, it will go away again" without too much of a time or overhead commitment. He said his team had the "start-up feel," out of the categories he had mentioned earlier. 

Though Mike has lived and worked in Redlands for years now, he is originally from Austria. We talked about the unpredictability of life. When he was starting out a career, jobs like his current position didn't intitally exist. He encouraged learning and starting out practicing the fundamentals, and allowing for greater flexibility in choices when they present themselves,past fundamentals. He commented that you can't make choices up-front, because you don't know what is to come. He encouraged me to find a space where you can develop and grow, and use that to progress. He did emphasize that Esri is focused on growth instead of hierarchy, and encourages employees to develop and grow into new positions, as they find the spaces they want to work in. 

I asked about structure and projects of the UI/UX team. Mike's team does not do any of the internal Esri design. This is all done by the Creative Lab, which falls under marketing. Instead, Mike's group supports products and projects for Professional Services with design work. 

I asked him about the design process, and particularly about any current design trends, as I am researching current design best-practics. He said that for products, it is risky to subscribe to a trend, which is often fleeting and temporal. They pick up design trends only if there is something they can do with it to achieve improved user experience or design. 

He also noted that Esri products need to follow consistent Esri branding, which is a large reality to take into account. Calcite is the group of standard design guidelines established by Esri, and can be used as prescribed building blocks to template products. I've worked with and been exposed to Calcite already through the Calcite React component library Cody and Josh put together to better integrate Calcite design standards and React. Mike noted that it is occasionally hard to have to tightly follow these design standards, as they are controlled by a different team. Occasionally the Calcite team falls a little behind of what the UI/UX PS team needs. Currently those areas of slower progression are probably animation and application design. This makes it more clear to me why Cody and Josh put together the Calcite React library themselves, in order to be able to have Calcite be application-specific. Mike has talked with the manager of Creative Labs and advocated for a greater overlap in these teams, especially when it comes to these design trends, and we can hope that more collaboration will come soon. 

Animations, transitions, and error messages are areas of focus in design right now. ArcGIS Indoors is a big project this UI/UX team is contributing to, which includes both a kiosk app and a web app. He used this example to outline the distinctions in design for mobile applications. Device-specific applications must have a common look and feel across different devices to remain recognizable. However, with different operating systems, this can be challenging. 