---
title: "Esri in One Hour: Michael Gaigg on UI/UX Design" 
date: "2018-07-12"
---

I had the pleasure of speaking with Mike Gaigg this morning about work, life, and user interface and user experience design. Michael took our Esri in One Hour to more of a personal place than my other chats this summer, and asked my right off the bat how I viewed my future. When I told him I was still flexibly exploring options, and that Esri was my first real internship in a corporate environment, he stepped me through some of his perspectives.

Mike shared with me that there are three types of companies in this tech area niche: "big-name" companies, such as Google, Facebook, or Twitter, where people may value the name over the actual day-to-day of work you are engaging in; start-ups, where they will either work or not, and be exhilaratingly adrenaline-propelled through either option; and Esri, which is placed in the category between these two options. In Mike's experience, Esri can feel like a start-up, a big company, or a family company, depending on who you work with. It is this blended mix of these environments, and, with such a flat structure, these elements proceed and coexist simultaneously.

Mike works in Redlands as an UI/UX Designer. Cody, here, is on his team, but is the one member out of Mike's 5-person design team who works in a regional office. There are always things for Mike's UI/UX team to do, and he commented on how he liked this pace of working with a lot of different projects. He said it was great to change gears so often, because transitioning kept thing interesting, and "if you don't like something, it will go away again" without too much of a time or overhead commitment. He said his team had the "start-up feel," out of the categories he had mentioned earlier.

Though Mike has lived and worked in Redlands for years now, he is originally from Austria. We talked about the unpredictability of life. When he was starting out a career, jobs like his current position didn't initally exist. He encouraged learning and starting out practicing the fundamentals, and allowing for greater flexibility in choices when they present themselves, past fundamentals. He commented that you can't make choices up-front, because you don't know what is to come. He encouraged me to find a space where you can develop and grow, and use that to progress. He did emphasize that Esri is focused on growth instead of hierarchy, and encourages employees to develop and grow into new positions, as they find the spaces they want to work in.

I asked about structure and projects of the UI/UX team. Mike's team does not do any of the internal Esri design. This is all done by the Creative Lab, which falls under marketing. Instead, Mike's group supports products and projects for Professional Services with design work.

I asked him about the design process, and particularly about any current design trends, as I am researching current design best-practices. He said that for products, it is risky to subscribe to a trend, which is often fleeting and temporal. They pick up design trends only if there is something they can do with it to achieve improved user experience or design.

He also noted that Esri products need to follow consistent Esri branding, which is a large reality to take into account. Calcite is the group of standard design guidelines established by Esri, and can be used as prescribed building blocks to template products. I've worked with and been exposed to Calcite already through the Calcite React component library Cody and Josh put together to better integrate Calcite design standards and React. Mike noted that it is occasionally hard to have to tightly follow these design standards, as they are controlled by a different team. Occasionally the Calcite team falls a little behind of what the UI/UX PS team needs. Currently those areas of slower progression are probably animation and application design. This makes it more clear to me why Cody and Josh put together the Calcite React library themselves, in order to be able to have Calcite be application-specific. Mike has talked with the manager of Creative Labs and advocated for a greater overlap in these teams, especially when it comes to these design trends, and we can hope that more collaboration will come soon.

Animations, transitions, and error messages are areas of focus in design right now. ArcGIS Indoors is a big project this UI/UX team is contributing to, which includes both a kiosk app and a web app. He used this example to outline the distinctions in design for mobile applications. Device-specific applications must have a common look and feel across different devices to remain recognizable. However, with different operating systems, this can be challenging. Similar to maintaining and improving the JSAPI (see Andy Gup Esri in One Hour post), user interfaces and components must be designed to maximize compatibility with a host of ever-changing devices and device-specific design requirements. Each device must have navigation signifiers, for example, that its users expect. In addition to thinking about this constant swirl of device-specific design and making sure interfaces and user experiences are both recognizably Esri and uniquely accessible in their design, Mike and his team must work with supporting the incredible amount of products Esri puts out and supports. He noted that Esri "just wants to be perfect," which is both one of the company's best and most high-maintenance characteristics. Esri does not field competition, but strives for perfection in product development and user support. Again, this feels like family to Mike, and the company embraces their users as key members of this large Esri family.

When asked about what he sees as the future for product development and design, Mike shared that he thinks data management and informatics will be cornerstones of the future. Increased intelligent design and analytics for vast quantities of real-time data processing will only improve. Also, he importantly noted that UI and UX designers are FINALLY gaining the recognition as crucial parts of any product design team. More than ever, users now demand experiences that not only work well, but feel good. There is an overarching lack of user patience for bad design, and UI/UX is crucial across any field, product, or progression. Any experience must be, **useful**, **appealing**, and relatively **intuitive**. People are faced with so many choices now, that the best design often wins out for attention. In the application space, developers now understand that users must _keep an application installed_, and UX designers are often instrumental in this retention of user interest.

We spoke about different areas of experience design. Research, usability testing, and interviews fall into a "psychologist" category for a user experience designer. There are also conceptual designers, who focus on design that makes sense--information hierarchy design would fall into this category. Then there are visual designers, who make sure interfaces look good and behave well, through integrated and interesting transitions, for example. Front-end web developers are most often tasked with translating designs into code, but also can embrace other levels of this design process to do more than translate design work.

For the Esri UI/UX team, they look for someone who has a good sense of graphic design and design in general. Someone who has aesthetics and design is key, as this is hard to teach. Also, a hire on this team must know development, and, most importantly, must not be afraid to touch code. Today, it is generally necessary to have some code experience to be accomplished and respected even with introductory design work.

Here is the part where we compliment Cody: Cody is not only a **great designer**, but also a great developer. He works between these areas to not only conceptualize, but build the bulk of Esri designs on our Professional Services projects. He stuck out as a good designer from the beginning, and has the capability to be the perfect combination of an aesthetic and fluid developer.

Mike then went back to giving me helpful professional development tips for my soon-to-be-out-of-university life.

1.  Find what you are really good at, and what your weaknesses are.
2.  With this, also identify what you are most interested in in a day
3.  Think about where these intersect, and let these guide both your progression into your inclinations, and also into goal-setting.
4.  IMPORTANTLY, build up a portfolio. Also, as much as possible, try to align portfolio work with the idea of what you want to do. Don't make a portfolio of graphic design book covers if you hate this. Strive to put together a portfolio of work that excites you, and tailor this to where you are trying to go--showcase where you want to be. This sounds obvious, but it clicked for me.

There are many paths, and it is hard to sift through to choose some right ones. Mike gave the example of his own background to showcase this. He had an Esri internship at one point. About 2 years after this, he circled back to Esri, thinking he would work here for about 2-3 years. He was not initially working in UI/UX design, but transitioned into this role at Esri. However, he referenced "getting stuck" and never leaving--not in a bad way, but in the manner that he grew into Esri. What he thought would be a short working engagement has morphed into a large part of his career. He also met his wife, who is from Peru, at Esri. He did really encourage me to think carefully about my work progressions, because time and life can stretch in unusual ways. He now lives in Redlands, though he and his wife do think about Peru and Austria.

Typically, successful projects at Esri involve UI/UX designers, and value them. It has been a pleasure working with Cody, the one member of Mike's team on location in Denver, and it is clear how key good design is to any current development work at least out of our office. I appreciated Mike digging into my personal goals, ideas for my professional progression, school, life, work, preparation and openness for growth, etc. His team will continue supporting cool products, and consistently developing new products while consistently supporting production. Mike emphasized that a job doesn't matter as much as the teams you work with, and I am so glad to have had a chance to connect with such an astute design guide with this conversation (thanks again for setting these up, Josh!). It was a pleasure, Mike, and thank you for sharing your teammate Cody with us so I can constantly ask questions and learn from him!
