---
title: "Esri in One Hour: Stacia Taggart on GIS in Transportation"
date: "2018-06-05" 
---
Today I met with Stacia Taggart for my first "Esri in One Hour" chat involving discussion of industry implementation of GIS. Stacia has recently transitioned from a development role to this more customer-oriented implementation role, and we also discussed this transition. 

Department of Transportations are one of the most rapid areas of new growth for the adoption of ArcGIS. Esri's first successful Department of Transportation relationship was with New York State Department of Transportation (NYSDOT). I had heard a short recap of this successful engagement at the Professional Services Open Meeting during my first week; Esri had helped NYSDOT to successfully deploy a host of snow management apps for NYSDOT, which not only provided route planning and organization of resources, but also enabled transparency for the public, allowing them to view real-time updates on snow removal across the state. I remember this had been initially presented to NYSDOT as somewhat of a proof-of-concept, which was quickly accelerated to be built out and deployed for a full snow season. This served as one of the first great, successful case studies for enabling real-time location intelligence for Department of Transportations, and this seems to have been the first group of apps to inspire some currently worked on "DOT Solutions" packages. 

- [Esri Snow Common Operating Picture (COP)](http://solutions.arcgis.com/local-government/help/snow-cop/)
- [New York State GIS Clearinghouse](https://gis.ny.gov/)
- [Article on integrating weather data to assist in efficient snow removal](http://www.esri.com/esri-news/arcnews/fall15articles/integrating-severe-weather-data-helps-manage-snow-removal)
[Add link for NYSDOT COP] 

The second Department of Transportation engagement is actually in Colorado, with the Colorado Department of Transportation (CDOT). This is where Stacia comes in as a key Colorado point-person. Quickly following, Louisiana, Florida, Rhode Island, Texas, and a growing list of DOTS have lined up to sign-on for similar Esri Enterprise Advantage Program (EEAP) relationships to enable ArcGIS to help in their respective areas. Apparently, up to 90 DOTs could be ready to engage, which is a massive and rapid increase in this user base which is requiring new configuration patterns for common transportation use cases. 

We talked about the order of engaging in new areas such as this, which I have been curious about. A current overarching goal in Esri engagements is to make GIS a true enterprise system. Accessibility for everyone in organizations is they main focus of this goal, and a key niche ArcGIS Online is growing to fill. I clarified one of the acronymns which I haven't been totally sure of yet, "System of Engagement" (SOE), which, in this context, is the context of location intelligence through ArcGIS that individuals across company levels can engage with every day, in approachable, clear, precise, and accurate ways. This helps me to contextualize the role of ArcGIS Online even more, especially following my discussion with Jeremy about more levels of ArcGIS Enterprise deployments. 

Generally, an EEAP engagement starts with a sales order, which flows to a needs assessment. In this needs assessment phase, an Esri advisor meets with all department to assess goals and user requirements. This also allows for establishment of who end users are, and perspective on end user requirements. 

Following this needs assessment, the technical advisor will come up with a write-up outline all of this, and lining out the number and type of apps that can be created to fit with these end user goals and requirements. These proposed apps are ranked according to level of effort and business value; for example, the apps requiring the lowest level of effort to result in the greatest business value will bubble to the top of this. 

From here, these top-ranked apps will be the starting point for implementation. Importantly, EEAP engagements are not contract-bound projects with specific requirements, but more proof-of-concept app examples and implementations. After these proposed apps have been ranked, an implementation plan is outlined. Implementation can fall in the hands of three options: 1) Self, meaning the technical advisor for the account, 2) an Esri partner or 3) another available Esri resource through Professional Services. 

DOT engagements have been stretching the initial goals of the EEAP program, through the scale of app proposals as well as the scale of potential DOT engagement across the country. I think Stacia mentioned that with one DOT, they had identified up to 90 potential apps, which seems huge to me. These are multi-year engagements, but this is still a massive scale of work, especially when extended to DOTs *everywhere*. A big challenge in this new DOT are is how to optimize and automate of these app deployments to help with scale and acceleration. Solution Engineers in the Sales department are starting on creating industry-specific bundles of configurable apps specific to these DOT use-cases. However, the workflow and resources haven't quite reached the organization and speed to deploy these to more than a few DOT accounts at a time, especially if any apps require customized support. These commercial off-the-shelf approaches of easily configured and deployed applications for specific use cases and workflows are quickly becoming normalized, however, and it seems to me that this will help with the accelerating pace of ArcGIS adoption in transportation and other industries. Customization still has a large role in creating effective applicatations, but these configurable approaches may get the software into beneficial areas more efficiently and quickly, to start. 

We talked about how this new role with DOT engagements was vastly different for Stacia from her development background. As a dot net developer, Stacia worked more independently on project work. Development was task and requirement oriented, and full of personal problem solving. In this new role, she is constantly communicating with customers and stakeholders. She showed me her calendar at one point, and it was a wall of phone call appointments covering an entire workday. I immensely respect her ability to switch roles so vastly, and she seems to be doing it with grace and the conduit of problem-solving, just in a different format than development. She emphasized the importance of networking at Esri, however, and commented on how valuable she felt it was to know the development teams and maintain relationships across the company, which further supported this new role. 

Stacia mentioned how at Esri, you could really make your own job by identifying and asking for what you wanted. Transitions and these changes, such as just starting with DOTs, were common and enabled across Esri. 

Stacia was the first person I have talked to where I could invision working on a project very similar to what she is doing with DOTs, which was a little nerve wracking! It is exciting but also nerve-inducing to picture an industry role. I was excited and intruiged by her new role negatiating between massive customer bases in a new industry where ArcGIS and location intelligence can massively expand and change the entire landscape of workflows, organization, and public-perception. This networking in a new area and thinking of massive scalability really got me excited, which was interesting to notice. However, I also see the appeal of staying hands-on as a developer. It has been calming and creative to be able to focus on development projects this summer, in distinction from my meeting-heavy networking calendar more similar to Stacia's wall of calls scheduled during the year. 

I really admire Stacia's ability to span both of these areas, and look forward to Esri expanding into DOTs across the country. CDOT seems like a large engagement, and I hope the Denver Regional Office can expand to support this early and pioneering work using ArcGIS in transportation. Stacia commented that a sticking point is that GIS has been historically slow to get acceptance, but I think ArcGIS Online, these successful application deployments, and a growing wealth of case studies are probably going to rapidly accellerate the adoption of ArcGIS not only in transportation, but across industries. The benefit is becoming more clear, and more effectively shared, and I'm somewhat on the edge of my seat waiting for this implementation trend to explode in magnitude, speed, and results. 
