---
title: "Esri in One Hour: Sam Libby on Nonprofits and NGOs" 
date: "2018-07-18"
---
Today I finally had an official meeting with Sam about Esri's work with nonprofits and NGOs. This is an area I am most interested in, and I have been really looking forward to discussing Sam's work with him. 

Sam started by outlining the two different angles from which nonprofit and NGO work is supported at Esri: Sales and Professional Services. The NGO Team in Sales is made up of six account managers and a couple of Solutions Engineers. Professional Services houses nonprofit practices, and is where projects take place. 

The account managers in Sales primarily work with large global organizations, such as the UN and related organizations. However, any nonprofit can apply to the Nonprofit Program at Esri. Registered nonprofits recieve *very cheap* licenses from Esri--almost 90% off normal rates. They are treated as full Esri customers, but pay much less than other for-profit customers. They can also participate in the Esri Enterprise Advantage Program, but at discounted rates. 

Sam gave me a basic overview of Sales at Esri, because I had not engaged with this area before. Sales is made up of three arms: Telesales, Inside Sales, and Account Managers. Telesales are sales made relatively autonomously, through calls or web purchases. These are transactional accounts, and involve little Esri personel egagement with customers. Inside Sales have "Jr. Account Managers." These customers may not need much Esri support or engagement, but may be large customers. Most Esri business comes from Telesales and Inside Sales. Account Managers, however, are tasked with Enterprise or large accounts. These accounts are large, high-priority, and important. The Account Manager is a customer's go-to person Esri person for their account. For example, the USPS is such a large account they have multiple account managers. The EPA another large account that warrents an Account Manager. 

The Account Manager is a strategic relationship for customers, and is also the point-person for Professional Services projects with customers. Sam works day in and day out with 6 account managers who manage nonprofit and NGO accounts. Professional Services has a special rate for small contracts in this area, which are rates that are cheaper than normal that count toward *any staff* work on nonprofit and NGO projects. 

Sam has a huge job. He is the main Professional Services representative for all nonprofits and NGOs. He takes in customers, assesses their needs or project scopes, and writes proposals for projects. If a proposal is accepted, Sam either manages the project, or scopes work to another member of Professional Services. His job is very in the business development realm, with most of his time currently spent on proposals and scoping. He also knows all current accounts, and is the Technical Consulting Program point of contact for them. 

Some nonprofit or NGO groups get support from Jack Dangermond directly. Jack is passionate about nonprofit work, and pays careful mind to large accounts in this area. For example, the World Health Organization always has multiple Esri point-people who work directly under Jack. Sam is hoping to get a standing budget for nonprofit work established to further support this customer area that has always been integral to Esri's mission and practices as a company. 

I asked about whether there were any commonalities among customers in this area, which is so diverse. Sam noted that most projects are centered on data collection. Nonprofits, because of their funding models, often rely on extensive, transparent reporting of their work. I will be working on a project to showcase nonprofit work, which plays into this reporting emphasis so key to this sector. There is also a huge focus on *baseline monitoring and evaluation*. 

We talked about how same fashioned this (massive) niche for himself managing this sector at Esri. Sam was part of the WHO Ebola response. During this time, he really integrated into these accounts. Conservation, Humanitarian, and Development are the three main areas of nonprofit and NGO engagement for Esri, and he is now intimately involved in most accounts. 

Sam noted that unlike most other companies, Esri hardly markets their nonprofit engagements. Esri does not treat this sector as a corporate marketing asset, and does not have an organizational account homepage to showcase this work. Jack treats this work more of a **responsibility** than something to showcase or advertise. I have mixed feelings about this, thinking that social good should still be highlighted to provide examples of how mapping can integrate and strengthen these humanitarian and conservation goods, but also respect the behind-the-scenes work Esri does accross the world. Esri works in most disaster response situations and humanitarian crises, but is never the one highlighted--nonprofit work is an obligation, and something that constantly occurs for low subscription rates accross the world. 

Sam is currently thinking of ways that the nonprofit arm of Esri can do more work for cheaper. Esri can still be expensive for project rates, and customers such as the UN are very competetive. However, Sam constantly works with Esri partners who may perfectly serve customer needs without engaging the whole process of an Esri Professional Services project and resources. This is really a streamlined problem-solving approach that does not value Esri labor above the expertise areas of partners. 

I asked about when Esri partners with international partners instead of managing international accounts themselves. Esri decided to run UN accounts, but it is as common workflow for international projects to first go through regional office because delivery and the end product of project work is often attached to local distributors closest to the project location. For example, if Doctors Without Borders, Geneva had a project, the Swiss Esri distributor would first engage with this customer. Smaller nonprofits also engage with distributors. 

Sam talked about the vast "virtual team of people" integral to work in this sector. Sam must scope work to Technical Advisors, distributors, and partners, that will be good fits for particualr international accounts. He is passionate about consulting training and development, and complimenting technical knowledge with best practices for relationship-building and proposal development. There is not a dedicated sector team for nonprofit work, but its network must be constantly on hand for projects. Sam has a massive and constant amount of work, and I am so intruiged by projects in this huge sector so important to Esri. 