---
title: "Esri in One Hour: Andy Gup on the JSAPI and Product Management" 
date: "2018-06-25" 
---

Today, Andy Gup and I met about his work as a Product Manager for the ArcGIS API for JavaScript, which is the API all of our web development work and ArcGIS Online is constructed on. Andy was the first individual I have talked to that lives and breathes software development, and his incredible depth of experience with software development, particularly for mapping, of course, is helping me to get a clearer picture of development lifecycles. Andy has been web mapping since its very beginning, in 1999. He "threw me back" into the earliest renderings of online maps, and mentioned that it wasn't until 2005 with Google Maps' slide navigation that you could pan to interact with a map online.

As I mentioned, Andy has worked with developing and managing, in that order, the [ArcGIS API for JavaScript](https://developers.arcgis.com/javascript/latest/api-reference/index.html) for many years. The ArcGIS API for JavaScript, most often shortened to the JSAPI, is the most used software product currently in the Esri software ecosystem. It is such a large and integral product that it has two Product Managers, of which Andy is one. Internal customers include all of the ArcGIS Online suite, web viewer(s), templates, and Story Maps. External customers engage with JSAPI products developed internally, such as Story Maps and ArcGIS Online, as well as customize locally hosted web services and web applications.

He led me through the many glorious aspects of software maintenance you have to worry about when maintaining and updating an API. The API must constantly reconcile compatibility with all browsers, HTML W3C standards, JS and ES7, third-party libraries, and all devices. For example, WebGL specifications are constantly changing. The JSAPI must constantly strive for parity or extension of functionality between all of these different specifications. Esri does not release patch releases, so problems must be addressed in batch releases. Development operates in Agile Sprints, with a combination of both manual and automatic testing. Automatic testing occurs nightly, and I enjoyed visualizing these cycles.

Interestingly, Andy could give me a very current and relevant example of addressing an API feature fix. The next release of the ArcGIS API for JavaScript is slated for early July, and just the previous Friday, Andy had discovered a bug. This fell into the category of a "show-stopper" bug, he outlined to me, which is a bug effecting one or more of the top 10 use cases. The rest of his week would be spent explaining this bug to the development team, identify consistency of where the feature was breaking in order to identify a fix, as well as negotiating with Product Owners about the relevancy and timeline of the fix for this bug -- would it be fixed by the early July release, or pushed to the next release date? While stressful, this was a lucky chance to get an extremely current, real-world example of the Product Management lifecycle.

I haven't talked with many people about the differences between different titles in software development. Andy did a great job of walking me through the respective responsibilities of Product Managers, Product Owners, Product Engineers, and Developers at Esri.

<strong>Product Owner:</strong> Product Owners hold responsibility for the product. They are held responsible for the overall success or failure of the product and all feature functionality.

<strong>Product Manager:</strong> At other companies, Product Owners often have the responsibilities and role of a Product Owner. However, at Esri, the Product Manager is slightly different. The Product Manager, which is Andy's title, represents external customers. Product Managers manage and direct developers, and translate between development and business-level timelines and feature requirements.

<strong>Product Engineer:</strong> Product Engineers represent internal customers. I could still use some clarification on the difference between a Product Manager and Product Engineer.

<strong>Developer:</strong> As has been told to me by other Esri developers who had held both development and management positions, developers operate in a very different way than management. Developers are focused on feature function, and are often working on iterative problems in a more isolated way than management. They have a task, they have a focus, and the do not have to worry about the budgets and business side, like managers.

Andy reiterated that software development is often "an art, not a science." He recommended Alan Cooper's book <i>The Inmates are Running the Asylum</i> as an insightful introduction into the dynamics of managing software and new technology in the developer/business intersection. Also, I'm going to look more into Gartner Analysts for papers on release cycles and innovation curves. On a more humorous note, he recommended the movie <i>Office Space</i>. We also talked about the interpersonal challenges or techniques of managing large teams. He elaborated on his perspective in the industry that one of the most challenging things that burns out many young software developers is the "perfectionist" characteristic of really having a clear vision of a solution or what you want, which is not often met in exactitude in a more messy reality of what actually happens in collaborative development and business specifications and timelines. Andy has worked as both a developer and now, recently, a Product Manager, so he has a healthy appreciation and ability to accommodate both personalities, it seems. As a manager, he now has to contextualize development problems for entire teams and stakeholders, as well as think about management-level things such as cost associated with bugs in feature functionality -- both quantifiable cost as well as the qualifiable cost to ArcGIS platform.
