---
title: "Esri in One Hour: Katy Dalton on Training"
date: "2018-07-17""
---
I'm wrapping up my Esri in One Hour conversations, and the summer is flying by as I near the end of my internship--it seems to have sped up. Today I met with Katy about her progression through Esri and her time as an Instructor. I had run into Katy a few weeks before, and she has been a friendly face in the office halls whenever I see her. We connected for our chat in the fun soundproof conference room, which I learned on my office tour used to be a recording studio for the former tenants. In the soft quiet of soundproofing, we had our conversation, rarely stopping to let the silence fill our ears.

Katy has been with Esri for about 14 years, and has been an instructor for the last 2.5. Before, she did core development work as a product engineer for a number of years. As a developer, she worked on the Runtime SDK for .NET, and produced a vast number of code samples. 

She transitioned to Training a couple of years ago, seeking more interaction with customers. She now holds a position as an Instructor, but Training Services is divided into a number of groups. Instructors are the "delivery" arm of the content for ArcGIS training, through instructor-led courses. Behind courses, however, there are content authors, instructional designers who focus on learning principles, editors, and product managers. 

Being an instructor has allowed Katy to interact with more people, which was something she was craving upon entering this new role. She says it really feels like you are helping people as an Instructor role, as you expose them to new capabilities to help their projects. This is hugely satisfying, and I can see why. In distinction from being a developer, as an Instructor, she sees the real-time results of customers learning about ArcGIS and how they can personally engage with the power ful software. Katy primarily teaches classes on ArcGIS Enterprices, server configuration, publishing services, and data management. Teaching seems like a very interested transition for her, because she has worked intimately with coding some of the concepts and features she now instructs. 

Training engages a lot with individuals and smaller entities using ArcGIS. A large customer area for training is local government: city, county, and state. I thought of the one instructor-led course here I took with Kevin Stellar, and the unique individuals I had in this virtual class with me! A couple were from local government, and others came from small organizations doing really innovative work, and excited to learn specifics about ArcGIS with specific projects or applications in mind. 

There are five instructors based out of the Denver office. Katy noted that one of the challenges of the instructor position is scheduling. Because classes are most often taught live, for whatever time zone listed for a particular course, the day-to-day scheduling of teaching can be long and changes often. Instructors have to be ready *early* to teach courses, and a course can run straight through 7am-5pm on a particular day, buffered by prep and close time. However, this was her one note, and did nothing to detract from her valuable engagement with her students. These are long hours when teaching, but rewarding hours, and she often stays after classes with students to discuss their questions, concerns, and excitements. 

Katy noted what many people I've talked with have brought up: At Esri, you will never know everything. She didn't necessarily anticipate being in a teaching role at the beginning of her time with Esri, and she doesn't necessarily plan on being an Instructor through the end of her time with Esri. This is what she wants to do right now, but she may pivot to another role after this time of growth, and that is what makes her excited about Esri! She views Esri as a very secure and fertile area to professionally grow, and I enjoyed talked to her abouth what has brought her to each of her roles, and her growth through all of them. Thanks, Katy! 
